And then so now it's recording so I'm with Gordon and Linda Shears and is this
Marshfield's? Saint Brides. Saint Brides okay and it's Friday July the 5th already 2019
so I'm just gonna pop this here yeah and Gordon can you just tell me
where you were born? Well I was born in Chapmans Farm in Peterstone in 13th of
February 1934 came here in the June and I've been here ever since. So why did your
parents move here? Well the Chapmans Farm wasn't big enough it wasn't it
wouldn't hold enough stock to pay you know make a living and I think the
owner was pretty hot on the rent at the time probably wanted three or four pound an acre
different than today. Was it Tridiga Park farm then? This was the one in Peterstone
wasn't it? Yeah so this one was the Tridiga? Tridiga Estate. Yeah so what sort of
landlords were they that you know? Well I didn't have much to do with them
because soon as my father died I bought it had passed to the Romney Builders or
yeah the Romney Builders right. Tridiga Estate I don't think they they didn't
bother you know they they come and done the repairs on the roofs.
Look what's wrong with the tree. The moorings climbed up the tree. Oh yes. Well I never I've never seen a mooring climb up the tree. Look at it right up there. The mooring that comes to
fall is the big mooring climb up there. Sorry about that. No that's alright.
So Gordon who were your parents what were their names? Well my father William James Sir O'Shares he was originally a father in all they
farmed in my custom. He when he was 18 in 1916 he was called up for the service
first World War went to France he was a in charge of a mule train taking supplies
up to the front and bringing never talked about it but probably bringing wounded
or dead soldiers back up to the rising mud and the trenches. They had to have
duck boarding down for the mules to walk on. If the mule went off the duck boarding
he had a heck of a job to pull him back on to it. And he had two years in the
service. Came home when my mother lived in the next farm, Newlands Farm which is
down beyond Shalim camp. I don't know much about it. Tell me about the when he
warned there was a fire. Oh yeah they had a they tunneled into this side of this
hill and they had places off a main entrance you know for bugs for the troops
to sleep and they had a big, I don't know what it was, a stove in the middle of it and this one
my father woke up and was full of smoke and it had caught fire. He went to his
superior officer and woke him up, told him. He didn't take much interest in it
but anyway he got out with five others. That's all of his platoon.
He got them, woke them up didn't he? But the officer went back to sleep.
Went back to sleep and died with the fumes. Quite a few did.
Well he was in a mattress to regiment. Yeah but he woke him up you know and told him
because the fumes killed him and I killed others. But Gordon's father went around
and got out with him. The officer did make the effort to come out with him but the others you know.
That's only one story he said and didn't say much about it. He had gas as well didn't he?
No he wasn't gassed. He was gassing, he made his chest bad.
No that was it yeah the wetness in the trenches and all it was never dry they weren't and he came out
and he had asthma then all his life. Really? And of course my mother was in the next farm,
Beatrice Elizabeth Ward. She drove a milk bloat in Cardiff delivering milk because they had
three or four milk carts. Her brothers Clifford and Albert they both had rounds as well and I
don't know where they got married but my father took a milk round in Patches Street in Grangetown
of his own and he had a Morris van and a rally motorbike and sidecar and he had a man working
for him. He had one round in town and one round in Pennyland and the Pennyland people paid up to
date because they were the affluent part of Cardiff but the ones in town by 1926 he was old 500 pound.
That was a long penny though see. So he sold the round and come and found the farm was
available he came out and started farming. Did you say he was delivering milk on the
motorbike and sidecar? With the sidecar yeah somebody I think my father drove the van,
a Morris van he had. But the horses left? He didn't have any horses on the work round.
All right. He was motorised. So but did because he was working with the mule trains on the back
you know was that because he'd worked with horses back home? Yes he worked with horses on his
father's place yeah because his father planned on the Rupert estate. Where was that? At Magreston
and the house was condemned and before he went to the army he hauled all the stone to build a
new house there and then the estate went bankrupt so they said we can't build a new house so this
farm will have to be joined onto the next one so he had to move out so they went to St. Gravel's
for a year or two. But in the forest of Dean? Yeah. Oh really? He didn't like it there and he knew someone I think
it was to do with the Baptist Chapel who owned new house and they took that on but he didn't live
long when he was there. So where is new house? New house is just this side of the
Shire Newton. If you noticed on the corner just before you go to the Shire Newton there's a house with no roof.
Yes. Well that's new house. Oh. They said that the walls are bold or something it wasn't worth
repairing that's why they let it go direct. It's a shame. It used to be a lovely house here.
Used to have goats and everything outside and ducks and chickens and everything it used to look so pretty
you know and by the road. Well Billy Cutter was. But now it's all untouched. Billy Cutter farmed it for years.
Now Cutter's farmed it and then
a saddler on it. The Coleman had it then. Yes the Coleman had it. So then your father and mother had to find somewhere else to live?
Yeah well they. You had to look around in Patches Street now I don't know whether they lived there as well.
I haven't got a clue where they lived. Did they have a dairy herd then? No but they had
milk come down in 17 gallon churns from Carmarthen every morning on the train.
You had to go to the station and pick up the churns. In Leaport? No in Cardiff.
And then they took them around and they took they used to put them in people's churns.
They had it in one bottle. No they had to dip it out the churn. They took it out ladled out and
yes put it in people's whatever they brought out. Yes.
So what's your earliest this is so your parents then came here? Cherry Orchard? Yeah in 1934.
Yeah so that was before you were born? No I was four. Three or four men told me. They were the
cat and dog always in Beecherstone that long one that's when he was born in that house. That's the one
they rented. Oh. So now you know he didn't come many miles away to come down here. I've been here
ever since. Continuous. 85 years. I'm the patriarch of the area since Phil Stocks. Since May or June.
Like it yeah. Since Phil Stocks died. Yeah. He's the oldest one. He would have had better.
You know. Better. Well I'm here with you now Gordon so we're gonna have to make.
But you know. I'm five years older than John Turner in Church Farm because he's coming up to 80 now.
Yeah yeah but Gordon stayed here where others that of their parents were here
and all that time had gone. They moved away got married and moved away and they'd come back
to the area like Sid. Not continuous. No Sheila. She moved into Newport for a while.
Yeah. But she's younger than me. But her mother died. She was living on the corner there.
You know. You just had the post office. Yeah. Do you have any brothers and sisters? I had a sister
born in 1926. She was eight years old when you went to John. Yeah. But she died when she was 80.
Yeah. In 2007. Yeah. Yeah. So what was it what's your earliest memory then here?
Can I name a few? I could remember.
And Gordon could remember when he was a young lad. We've got a gun sight field down the lane.
In the wall. In the wall. The servicemen used to go down to train with their guns. There was a
teapot where they used to be sat in that pit with the going across they'd be firing to train.
They used to take coachmen to the bottom of the fire. We've got this one shed still there.
The other part of the other shed is up here in pieces up here. We got to put together one day.
But yes they took over the field and they used to do the shooting and everything. Train them.
Every day they'd bring him down and take him back in the evening.
When he was down there with his dad, a little boy, just before the wall,
in the wall, he was down the field with his father and they were doing something,
checking animals I suppose or whatever. He looked up and saw a plane and he was waving
to them because it was so low down. It was a plane with a man taking films and photographs
of the docks. He was waving to him and the man, you could see his face of the man looking down
like you know because he was taking photographs of the area for them to bomb the docks.
That's amazing. Instead when they did start bombing Rona's area,
Patti Reese used to live in the farm, a long farm down there, that people can stay there now
in caravans and whatever. It's all done up now. She's gone now. But the bomb came down there.
The landline came down there. When they had a big fire in the night, all were in the house.
When they came out in the morning, there was this big unexploded bomb with the parachute on it.
They dropped two mines. The one in the field over the road exploded. It took the roof off the house.
Yeah. So her house was this house? No. Someone else's house. Really? Yeah. But they had the
mine right there. They stayed there all night and with this exploded landmine. This German had been
taking the photographs, look at everything and Gordon had waved up to him like you know. He was
looking down. Someone had gone out with a lamp, a dim lamp and he'd seen it and he dropped the bomb
then thinking it was someone's signal. This was in the night, not in the day. I know in the night
just pitch black you know. So of course he thought someone was giving him a signal to drop the bomb.
So he didn't have any sense. So of course you know he just missed the dock then. Why?
That's an incredible story. Yeah. They dropped some down just the other side of the village as well.
Yes. And exploded that was. Where was that then? In front of Greyhouse farm. Yeah. And
they closed the road so that our bus service used to have to go along the main road and down the
narrow road here. We used to have a driver who only had one eye and he used a belt down
that road and he was only wide enough for the bus. He used a belt down that road in the dark.
You couldn't imagine that the lights on the bus were very dim because they didn't allow them.
And there was big greenies on the one side. It was to scare the life out of us.
How long was the road closed for then? About a fortnight I think.
So were there any craters left from where these bombs were? No, they all filled up.
They filled up. Yeah the one where the landmine, that was a crater for years. It had even that
reeds growing in it and things. It was full of water but in the end Peter Rees filled it up.
Was your firebird called up for the second world war? No, no.
He wouldn't have gone anyway because his asthma was too bad. Oh gosh, yeah. No he would have been
41 then so he would have been a bit too old. Yeah and he had the farm and everything to me.
So what sort of farm was this then? It was always milking. Sheep.
Pigs they used to have years ago. I didn't see any pigs because they'd gone. Chickens.
But they had dairy, milking so it was hard work all in the night.
They allowed Italian prisoners to work on the farm and the one, he was a tall thin fellow I can
just about remember him. His name was Gatti G-H-E-I. I don't know what his first name was and he was a
really hard worker. He was drafted into the Italian army and he won happily by it and I think he was
glad to be captured and he worked hard. There was another one who was the exact opposite him. He
was short and dumpy and he was a lazy so and so. But he had Gatti for quite a long time.
So they would be dropped off in the morning? Yeah they had a like a hammy lorry type.
They'd all sit in the side and they'd drop them off pick them up about five o'clock in the night.
Where was the POW camp then? There was one in Van Martin. One on the corner they used to have.
You came from Newport. Where that big gate is. Opposite Devon schools.
Opposite Devon schools there was a camp. But there's one where Trevor used to have as well was there?
Oh that was an army camp. There was a battery. There were no prisoners. One of them went to
prison there? No. I thought there were. Van Martin was a prisoner of war camp and that one there at
Dufferin. The camp in Trinidad House. Well by Trinidad House that was American.
When I was in school there was root martyrs. Americans just had root martyrs past us.
We used to go out to see them. Mrs William just said I was to go out to see them by the gate.
Nearly every time we went past somebody would throw out a load of sweets.
That must have made such an impression on the young boy these Americans. Yeah they were really
you know long.
I don't know when he was in them but there have been a lot. Over 100 probably in each one.
There'd be one go past and then there'd be another one. There might be two or three.
Three groups. Yeah I don't know how far. He'd had to march all the way around.
What school did you go to? The one in the corner in St. Brights until I was...
It's a little... there's a... where the churchyard is and the very corner is a little small churchyard.
Well that building next to it was the school. It was only a small one just for so many people.
It was 35 I think. Oh my goodness. We saw it before it got done up. You know I looked in the room.
They were going to do it and you know maybe took a lot of stuff away.
But you know it wasn't very big room but it was cozy like. Yeah.
Oh they had a fire in it. Yeah. One classroom there was only one teacher every day.
Yeah. There was too many for her. She couldn't handle it because we were there until we were
11 or 12. Or if you didn't go to Beasley you went there till you were 14.
And of course she couldn't teach the young one that knew intake and the older ones. So they split
it and Mrs Morris came then. Well did they just have a curtain across the... No they just split it
one side and the other. You had to put up with Mrs Morris telling the kids because I was a bit
bigger then. Mrs Morris telling the kids starting them on the alphabets you know.
Mrs Hughes was there when I went there. I must have started about beginning of 39.
And while I was there Lynn Harding was a very famous
Shakespearean actor before the war and during the war. And they had a plaque in the school wall,
on the school wall with his you know a bronze thing with his
autograph you know his outlining on it and embossed it was and writing on it. I don't
know where it is now. It went in the church. Why was that there? And then it's supposed to
have gone in the hall after. Did he come visit it then? He came and visited it. I thought so.
To see it. Yeah. Did you? All I can remember of him he was a very impressive looking man and he
had a very very deep voice you know. Come to think of it he was a really
a Shakespearean actor with his voice. Very much like what's his name?
Richard Burton. Richard Burton's voice. Yeah I thought you meant Richard Burton.
So was it, did this actor, did he have any links to St. Brian? Yes he was born in the church house,
the pub. Yeah it's a house now. It's still got a kind of a mouth but it's a big house now. They've
put houses all in the area where the car park used to be. That's up the side church road.
That's just on the corner here at the end. But yeah he was you know very
soft. Yeah he was born there. I don't know what he did in the church. That's amazing. You remember that?
Yeah they used to, another member of the war was they had smoke screens. They had lobbies with
trailers behind them with oil in it and a chimney up the back and they used to generate smoke through
these, this chimney and if whichever way the wind was blowing if the wind was blowing from the west
they'd be over this side and it would be blowing all over the but docks. It's just clouded against
air attacks. If it was an easterly wind they'd go over an ash and they generated there. You remember
that? I can remember them. I remember them just down the road here practicing one day
and my father used to be in dread of them going further up because he was asking me wouldn't
have been able to take the smoke. Yeah luckily they never did. They did down on the corner there,
they did generate it. A practice one in the daytime that was. So you must have seen quite a bit of
activity because you had Newport docks that side, Cardiff docks this side. We used to get under the table
very often when we had the German bombers over. My mum used to live in Newport and she actually saw
they were all firing up at the planes and she actually saw a German plane spiraling down on fire
and they could see the pilot in there before he crashed into a house. It was a tobacco in his family
he had tobacco shop and all his family were killed. The mother, father, daughter were killed in his
house opposite my mum's but they actually saw that he couldn't do anything the German pilot to avoid
because he'd been hit look see and he was on fire and he died himself but you know crashed into
opposite the other side of the road to where my mum lived. That's where the fire station is now.
The fire station's there now. Off road. Off road. Yeah. Gosh. Yeah.
Did you ever have sirens going off down here? All the time yeah.
Did you have gas masks? Yes I had to take gas masks to school every day on my back.
You get told off if you got to go back home and get it if you didn't take it bring it.
So you should make you go back home and get it. So how far was school for you then from here?
Oh just in the village down the corner then. What are you about quarter of an hour? It's about
200 yards isn't it? No it's more than that. 300 yards. So you had to walk there on your own?
Well there's a couple of others used to come to my aunties and my aunties.
I've been driving. So very very rural here. I mean the western Welsh buses used to bring
the sailors down for their practice and sometimes a driver would stop and say do you want to lift to
school? He used to get in the bus and go down to the school. They wouldn't be alone. No.
Where were the sailors doing their practice? Down in the shed I told you about. Oh really?
At the bottom of the lane we've got a big shed there. Oh that's where they were doing it? There
used to be all windows in it but children broke in. So what were you doing there? There was an
office there. They had an office there for the ones that were sitting there. As I said they had
the pits with the gun and they pretend planes going across and they'd be shooting at them like
a big target practice. They had a big target on the bank and a big ash heap in front of it
on the field and they had a machine gun in Peter Rees's field halfway down the lane and they used
to fire at this target and the stray bullets that were off just to go in the ash and after the war
a fellow went down there and sieved through the ashes and he had about I think about 10 full big
bags of bullets out of the ashes. We still found them later because the woman down the lane got the
bomb disposal and they came to visit her and because he had to go in Elfield and he was going
and the children were playing in Elfield. They shouldn't have been in there like because there
was animals on all end. But anyway they found these bullets and everything and these
these ammunition of course they were wearing them. They thought it was unexploded. So they had the
army the boys came here. I don't remember that. Yeah it was you know they had two children.
Ginger yeah remember. I can't think of that. Julie. Oh Julie and her husband yeah. Did you have a
shelter at school? A bomb shelter at school? Yes well it was above the ground. I don't know
where it's still there in the playground. It was part of the Hale Ash you know big inches.
Or was it like a? No it was just a brick building with a concrete roof. Two doors in it that's all.
We never used it. It was never a day like air raid down here. No. Not longer in school. Did you have
to have like practice at school about what to do if it did go off or anything like that? I expect so.
I can't remember now. So I remember after I was born just after war 94 to 5 I can remember they
used to do the sirens. Yeah they had one by Shepherd's Fish Shop didn't they? Yeah they
used to let it go off a certain day every month or something. To make sure it worked. Make sure it
worked in case there was any. Really? Yeah I can remember that. Yeah I don't think it's there now.
No I haven't done anything for years. During the Cold War it was. Yeah did you have a bomb shelter here
at home? No only the table. They were into the kitchen table. It's hilarious when you think about
that the kitchen table. Were there any gun batteries down here? Yes well on the on the corners
where there's all these bends are there was an army camp there that was an artillery and radar station.
Yeah. Yeah they had all sorts of guns there. Yeah that's why I thought there was prisoner
walls well but it was all this army station was it? Yeah. That's where I told all the buildings were in
I thought. Yeah there's still a couple of buildings there. There are still buildings. Really? Yes they're lovely strong
buildings they are as well. But yeah they. Well after the war the people that were short of houses they all
went in there and took possession of it and there was probably about 20 families living in there.
So they had a place to go to because of the war. They were there for a good while because Mrs. Pugh was
Arthur McGann. Yeah. Oh McGann. Arthur McGann. Yeah that's his. Is he buried in the church house? Yes.
Yeah. So was he an Irishman? No no no he loved him he never knew his parents he was in a
in a home but in a home he was you know. They were both in the services. In the services. And
he was born and they had to go back into the services. He's from Melvin Farrow and you've never heard from him again.
No. No. He says. But um. I think he was in London there you want it. I don't know he came down here but
I can remember him. He worked for Derek Baker to Orchard Farm driving the ford and tractor
and used to do some ploughing and all and
because I know he went past our front gate with his discarrows and caught the gate and bent it.
It was never the same. Mrs. Pugh was she there as well? Mrs. Pugh had the first one. They were the first in.
She was instigator. So who was she then? She lived in Church Road as well. But had they come from outside the area?
No. I don't know where she came from but Bill Pugh was born down here. His father was a
railwayman. And he, I know his father was a railwayman. But he worked on the roads.
For the, maybe in some islands. He used to drive an island motorcyle trimming the roads.
In the summer. I don't know what he did altogether. But he had a gammy leg from a motorbike accident.
So when he was on his motorbike he had his one leg stuck straight out because he couldn't bend it.
What about the Home Guard? Do you remember them? Yeah I can remember them. They got in trouble.
They had a pill box down
Pontestal Ground which is down past the lakes at the moment. And they were supposed to watch
the Bristol Channel you know. And the commander went down there one night and found them all asleep.
And that was riot. They put foot before the firing squad for being a super duty.
Yeah. Did you know any of them? Any local men?
A few used to come here to John. John was his age years old mental. She did go dancing and a few of
them would bring her home. Because we got spoons from one of the, from the US. Oh US. I got on them.
And two spoons. I use regular. Every day I use them. And they're still lovely looking spoon.
They came out of the pig swill they did. Did they? Someone put them in did they? No they used to,
they used to collect it, boil it up and they called it nutrient. And they used to deliver it
for the pigs. Of course when you were chopping it up you'd find a spoon in amongst it. Yeah
where they'd emptied it in. I'm looking what they were emptying in from their pigeons.
So Joan would have been a young woman at the time. So she used to bring, they used to drop her home
looks here after dance or whatever. Yeah. Walk her home. Walk her home. Yeah. Well she was,
she joined the land army because all the, all the, when they come to 16 or 17 they could join the
land army. Yes. So she joined the land army. And where did she work? She worked here. She could
work at home. On the farm. Really? So did she wear what? Yeah. She wore the land army uniform.
Yeah the breeches and all. Yeah. And the green jumper I think it was. Yeah. Was it good, were
there lots of dances with the Americans? I don't know. I don't know. There was. There used to.
Auntie Phyllis and Uncle Penry, she used to have them bring her, bring her, because she stayed here
for a while. Yeah. Lived here for a while she did. Auntie Phyllis did. Gordon's mum's sister. And
she can, she said she was walking home with one of the servicemen and she didn't realize it. It
was a pitch black you know because they didn't have any lights along here. Yeah.
Never do. There's still no lights. But he was bringing her home and was they married there?
They weren't married there. They weren't married but they were caught in her,
fiance was walking behind him and she didn't know. Walked all the way up. Listen to him and
Uncle Penry. He said she never knew. Of course I bet she had a shock when she heard. I bet she did.
Oh my goodness. She got married before the war. He was an
Air Force. But he went off with an, she had one child I saw and he went off with another woman.
So she was on her own. So she was literally, she got, she was divorced and
Penry was trying to, wanted to court her before she got married. Oh I see. He was
heartbroken when she married him. Oh never, I never knew that. Yeah.
But anyway in the end of course he did marry her. Oh. But that was in 1946. He had a little girl and
he treated her as his own you know. Oh that's nice. Now they never had any more children. Oh yeah.
But he was, she was quite tall Auntie Felicity, Uncle Penry because he was shorter. Yeah he was.
Nice looking man, he was always fresh looking. He came here to, he brought the, they had the farm
car because he worked on the mother's farm. Brought the car here to pick my mother and father up to
come get married and we'd bought a tractor a couple of days before and they delivered it.
And that's, he was in his wedding suit and he had to get up on the lorry and drive the tractor off
the lot before he went to his wedding. So what was it like growing up here in this you know,
in this village in this area and has it changed much? Well it changed quite a lot.
This, the traffic is bad. Traffic is terrible now because it's between the two cities. It's
early mornings and Auntie time you know all the children, it's the lorries that go past,
it shakes the house. I can't. I yeah, I always remember we were going, I said to Linda you know
we were going to buy a bull up in Abergavenny or see this bull in Abergavenny back in mid-60s
and Albert Priest saw them and his wife, they said they'd drive us up to see this bull
but they couldn't get away in the day so he said he'd be here at about seven.
Well I was waiting outside from seven o'clock until eight o'clock and the only thing that went past
was a red and white bus, a service bus. There was no other vehicles went past.
We got up to Abergavenny about, well Lambeth when it was, must have been about
nine o'clock, half past nine and we, he still went and seen the bull and bought it.
We had to go down through the churchyard to these sheds he had the other side,
walk through the churchyard at nine or ten o'clock at night. Oh with pitch black.
It was in November time. What was it, what did you do as a boy? What sort of things did you get up to?
Oh the usual things. You used to help as well didn't you? Oh my father, you couldn't do
nothing you know, you had to go out and do things. So what did you do? What sort of jobs did you have?
Well NEA making, it was the post user. Yeah. In the making time we'd have to
rake around the corner the edges or turn A that the turner couldn't get to or things like that you
know. In the winter I was cleaning out more than anything because. And the animals you see. Yeah
because if my father's chest was bad he, I'd say I used to say to Linda, he'd sometimes he'd sit in
the chair by the fire and we had the living room was out the back then he'd sit in there perhaps
for two days he couldn't move because he couldn't get breath. So did your mother have to do a lot
more then? I know my dad used to work on the steam engines he was a boiler smith there's no
sheds now, don't make class of sheds with this all houses and flats there now. But I,
because he was working on the steam engines he'd go in the hot firebox
to repair them. Yeah. And of course his lungs, he had collapsed lungs and I never knew him to be
well. I mean he died when I was making to my 19th birthday but he couldn't breathe because his lungs
they said they don't know he kept working as long as he did because in the end you have to, the last
couple years of his life he had to stop working because he just couldn't breathe at all. He didn't
breathe for years like his lungs and you know because of these you know it affected him all
from you know and I used to go down get mum's money on a Thursday to pay insurance bankers
to be done to return but the steam all the steam engines I wish I'd taken photographs but all the
steam engines all shapes and sizes would be in the jet and all the fumes coming from out of them
and it was beautiful sight all the fire boxes and all because they you know and he'd used to you know
then days they didn't have the safety things like that but if you have to try your engine out
when I went down to get he'd say oh then look I went on one side when I'm he took me home
to the bridge where you have to try the engine out check it was working right
drop me at the bridge so I don't have to walk up and about the house then
but you wouldn't you know I mean you would they wouldn't allow it now you have to try it out you
know I love it yeah be black when he come home with the oil and the grease and you wouldn't do it now
would you you were five or six oh six seven you know used to go down there to get their wages
all alone yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
and dad used to put his clean hose out and I had a lovely white hand because he's from
Borealmore and he's had put his handkerchief down for me to sit down while he was doing a little
job to have a chat and me throw it back home yeah a lovely memory to have yeah he'd have his tools
on his handkerchief to keep them clean like when he was doing the job yeah did you have a do
living down here do you have your water courses in your reins
would you know every rain and water course on your land yes also yeah some of them have been
filled in now but uh I I was a state unit the same but what's the name of them love any names
was this is the seal and renew yes about the only one that's named
but that's all on the maps so you wouldn't know the names of the others on your land
there's no other so I we never had any fields names I know there was some of them some of the
fields had names I don't know how they got them I mean the gunsight field we call it the gunsight
because they used to do the training and they had a name to feel but there was
whether one opposite the camp take and Billy Williams used to call it the buttollo
but what it was called the buttollo I don't know that's the one I don't know where it's the one
Derek of just mold or the one next to it at Shervington not now we used to have a field by
the lighthouse itself as well you know the round lighthouse we started field down there
it was a 10 and a half acre field but they put a big bank so it they've spoiled it all now really
because it's a beautiful field did you have a name what was the name of that one we just called it
the lighthouse field the lighthouse field yeah but didn't have a name yeah so did you have grips in
your fields yeah do you still have grips on some of them yeah some have been filled in some list
too and the watering's in the middle the deep ones so does it because um so so from people
outside the area this is quite quite unique this water drainage or the water course system down
here is it something you just take for granted now or do you understand how it works and which
direction oh yeah well it all it all goes down to the goat the flow is down to the goats and then
the big green coming from marsh field collects there too and then they got a i don't know if
you've been down there have you on the foreshore they've got a big lagoon there that um they made
by the golf club you mean yeah yeah uh they got a big lagoon there that um they made years ago
to collect the water rather than build up and collect the roads because i can remember
going going through
i went to basic school the bus used to we used to have to go to the goat to cut
cut to western welsh it used to come from cardiff would be just on up from marshfield
and um it was flooded they couldn't get through so they sent a double decker which was higher
and that got through a couple of days and then gradually the water went down until there was
only a small area in the middle and um this day still had the double decker he didn't ease off
to go through the water he went straight through it at full speed yeah we were in the top front
and it went all over the top of the bus oh my god downstairs it blew the inspection
chair in the in the island you know in between the seats they had inspection patches
lower morgon and drunk all the girls because the girls used to stay downstairs they all got wet
was it unusual to have flooding here what was this we never had any flooding here it was only
down the down the broadway well before the the romans was it today before the romans did it it
was all flooded you the dutch the dutch was it the dutch yeah the dutch came and did all the rains
yeah well he's reputed to have done it like more just marshy moors because it there wasn't any
um drainage then it was all water well i think i was over the other side because it's amongst
ditch over the other side yes you've know about it do yeah because the um tint and abbey they had
they used to bring all the cattle down for the summer and graze on the marsh in in the
redwick area and mega but i don't know what happened what was this was used for back
well certainly roman pottery has been found hasn't it um where the neils live where marjorie and
oh don't you remember me that's that way yeah yeah um oh they've spoiled that place to me
haven't they with the industry they got there now it's so different isn't it now what was it
like what did it look like there before it was just like this or me farm fields was it really
that that new road they cut through where the um aldi distribution and there was nothing of that
there it was all just one couple of lanes going down and all fields yeah just all fields everywhere
gosh when i i mean since i've been down here 48 years now really um and um we didn't have any
lights did we love because the roadway wasn't up there it was pitch black down here in the light
there wasn't any of the lights was it along the road or anything whereas that brightens up the
it'd be pitch black you know and the buildings that are down here since uh i've been down here
the building that's gone up because it was very uh old lots of fields i remember being at the
gare in jaynard's enclos looking down here at the odd light from my bed from our bedroom window
looking down you'd see the odd light yeah where little did i know that i perhaps saw the the light
from the family yeah you know but um that i'd be living down here but um not much at all you know
as far as um no well the fields rumney wasn't wasn't really very big then
and on the sunday all the all the um the boozers used to come out to the pubs in rumney because
they could open the pubs here because it was still casters in england the rumney river bridge was a
border and they couldn't open in wales which was in cardiff so they all used to walk out to rumney
and get drunk in rumney which pubs were then which clubs oh the there's a rumney castle in rumney
and the crossing at the top cabiners arms used to be there but that's gone now that's a
no that's a what's name sainsbury's shop that was the three main ones
there wasn't more there was about five or six in some islands but that was a fair walk so this was
considered england at one time yeah so until recent times well it was in it was it was in
in england then and then it became wales and monmouthshire and now of course it's just
the boundary of the river way in chapstow and we valley that's considered with the boundary of
wales now because i was talking to a lady she she was brought up i think it was new house farm
near where the neil's live well that's the and she was saying because you know well that's
i said a new house when new was it new new house or newton newton house newton farm what was the
name of the rain there's a look there's an upper newton lower newton and middle newton yes
so a lady called stephanie she's stephanie davis now but um she was saying that where she lives
horses probably um no i don't recognize the name because she said where because it's
rumley's been really built up now yeah she remembers haymaking there yeah so you must have seen
such development around here well i can remember going to the some ellen show on
land rumney by run land rumney hall and that was all parkland then square williams lived there
really yeah and that's all the rumnest land rumney estate now it's all built on
if you go along the main road into room of the card if i need to carry on the right hand side
going in or the left coming out there's one one house that don't blend in with the others and
that was the lodge that was the main entrance to the uh land rumney hall and i think the land rum you
key to the gate across the road so they can work the key to the gate